6 months in at my job, and the past two weeks I started feeling odd; I've been busy, cranking out more than ever, but feeling a bit burned out. At first I chalked it up to working hard, and enjoyed my time-off for the holidays. But I came back, and didn't feel that same passion. What's going on? I doubled down, cranked out more than ever, and buried myself in working hard.

Last week, an office mate was going over our expenses, and asked me about a really LARGE charge from Google. Big enough I'm embarrassed to even post the number here. I logged in to adwords, and sure enough we were hitting our daily cap every day, and that cap wasn't low! 

Some history - Two months ago, the question came up: are our users representative of the market overall? Since we've done no marketing to date and all our users come from blogs and word of mouth, we weren't sure if they were self-selecting in some non-representative way. We had the idea to get a more random sample of users by using adwords - set up a campaign, and see how the usage of people from adwords compare with our general user base. We ran the campaign, leaving google to it's auto-bidding thing. We grabbed a bunch of keywords, set a super high daily cap for the experiment, and watched it closely. After 3 weeks, we were running about $20/day in ads, and getting 1-2 signups a day. Then I forgot about the account.

Jump back to last week, and we have our huge bill. I quickly shut adwords down, and moved back to getting stuff done off my todo list. A day later, in passing, I mentioned the adwords SNAFU to James, one of our founders. His immediate question: "At least we have a bunch of people - how do they validate our hypothesis?" <strong>SMACK</strong>. Kick to the head.  I had forgotten the whole reason we ran the experiment in the first place! I got so caught up in <em>doing</em> things, I'd missed the whole point.

At a startup, regardless of your position, you're there because you're a self starter. You like setting your own priorities, figuring out the right items to focus on. The key is, not to get trapped in the work you're doing. For me, it's great to get success stories out, push some marketing activities, get customer feedback, push forward the features through engineering, and drive process improvements. That's what I do. But why? And are they the right things to do now to answer those goals. For me, the answer was no.

I've now got a clear set of goals I'm working towards: Better define and optimize our funnel. Understand our customer profile. Validate our hypothesis around customer segmentation. I've still got my list of todos (<a href="http://culturedcode.com/things/">Things</a> rocks). Now they're hyper focused on working towards those goals, not just working to checking off todo items.

I'm so excited to go into the office tomorrow, I can't wait.